# Applying Predictive Analytic Capabilities for CardioMEMS Patients
Paper and code for my Wisconsin Data Science Capstone project in conjunction with the University of Kansas Health System to apply predictive analytics to heart failure patients with a CardioMEMS device.

## Abstract
Heart failure is a chronic disease in which the heart is unable to supply a sufficient volume of blood to the body. Patients with heart failure experience frequent hospitalizations and trips to the emergency room. Although heart failure hospitalizations have decreased in the Kansas City metro area in recent years, the disease is still a significant societal burden and the leading cause of death in the State of Kansas. The University of Kansas Health System (TUKHS) is treating a number of advanced heart failure patients with CardioMEMS, a micro-electromechanical device implanted into the pulmonary artery to measure hemodynamic pressures and heart rates. This analysis aimed to determine if we could predict four adverse heart failure-related events by employing supervised classification algorithms with interpretable results using a combination of data from the CardioMEMS devices and patients’ electronic health records. The adverse health events in scope for this analysis were all-cause hospitalizations, heart failure-related hospitalizations, use of intravenous diuretic therapy outside of a hospitalization, and changes to pulmonary artery diastolic (PAD) pressure thresholds.  

Data was extracted from the TUKHS’s Epic electronic health record (EHR) system, deidentified, and exported to comma separated value (CSV) files for analysis. The patient cohort consisted of CardioMEMS patients (n = 88) who were enrolled in the TUKHS program between April 2019 and June 2020. After fixing errors, imputing some missing data, and performing feature engineering, we aggregated and combined the timeseries device data with the patient level risk factors for predictive modeling. Based on our goals and dataset characteristics we chose logistic regression, random forest, and boosted decision trees for our classification algorithms.  

Our predictive models were successful against test data for three out of the four targeted adverse events. The all-cause hospitalizations model had an AUC of 0.944 using boosting with all predictor variables and scaled training data. The heart failure hospitalizations model had an AUC of 0.88 also using boosting with all predictor variables and scaled training data. The IV diuretics model had an AUC of 0.987 using boosted trees with select predictor variables and scaled training data. Our predictive model for PAD threshold changes was not successful. The best algorithm produced an AUC of only 0.767 using post-stepwise logistic regression and scaled training data.  

Our analysis also produced a number of significant features related to our four targeted events that can be monitored by the clinical team at TUKHS. If and when the successful models are put into use, our analysis could help focus the care of the clinical team towards patients with the greatest risk of adverse events, reduce healthcare costs, and improve the quality of life for CardioMEMS heart failure patients.
